[Music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio
news.
[Music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OLOTS podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway
>> and I'm Joe Weisenthal.
>> Joe, another day, another emergency
episode. I mean, we're back to emergency
episodes, and this is obviously one of
the big ones.
>> Yeah. So, we are recording this on
August 26th, and we had news overnight
that President Donald Trump intends to
fire Lisa Cook from the Federal Reserve
Board. Obviously, this feeds right into
the debate over central bank
independence and what the president
actually has a right to do when it comes
to hiring and firing. And uh the market
reaction this morning, gold up a bit,
the dollar down, but what's really
interesting is we have yields at the
long end of the Treasury market picking
up, which would suggest there's more of
a risk premium being built into that
market.
>> No, totally. The concerns over Fed
independence sort of cast a whole shadow
of the recent Jackson Hole event. And of
course, okay, so we're recording this
August 26th. this morning an episode
with Adam Posen which was sort of about
this surreal experience there where
everybody knew that the threats to
central bank independence were the
number one story in monetary policy and
yet no one was really talking about it.
Maybe people are trying to lay low
trying to act business as usual and then
we get this and so what was something
that maybe people hoped to imagine a way
or sort of not you know look at the
other direction is now right here. Well,
we also had Trump tweeting that he
wanted to fire Lisa Cook while Pal was
giving his speech, which definitely
underscores the tone of Jackson Hole
recently. Okay, so there's clearly a lot
to talk about, including whether or not
Trump can actually do this from a legal
perspective. And I am glad to say we
have the perfect guest, someone we have
spoken to before on this exact topic of
central bank independence. We're going
to be speaking with Lev Manand,
professor at Columbia Law School and
also the author of The Fed Unbound. Lev,
thanks so much for coming on the show
again.
>> Thanks for having me back.
>> So, I'm going to start with a very
simple question. Is there any precedent
in history for a president firing
someone from the Federal Reserve Board
in this way?
>> No. There have been no firings of
members of the Fed board by the
president since the Fed board was first
created by Congress in 1913. And there
haven't been any attempts by presidents
to remove any officers of the United
States for cause in over a century. And
so we're in unchartered waters here in a
number of different respects. We're
going to get into the ostensible reasons
for the firing obviously, but as
lawyers,
what does for cause mean?
So for cause, one of the legal questions
here is what constitutes cause under the
statute? And in federal law, in
independent agency law, usually Congress
specifies the causes. And there are
three common ones. Inefficiency, neglect
of duty, and malfeasance in office.
These are the classic causes. The
Federal Reserve Act is unusual for not
specifying specific causes but saying
simply for cause. So one issue here is
is it just the standard causes or do
other things count? And that's really
important because the standard causes
all have to do with your conduct in
carrying out your job. Malfeasants in
office as opposed to malfeasants out of
office. there was an intent by Congress
not to include private misconduct as a
ground for presidential removal from
office. And so one question here is
whether private misconduct even counts.
I think something that's very clear we
should just say upfront allegations of
private misconduct definitely don't
count. That does not come within the
statute and that's one of the reasons
this
>> why
>> because of all the due process concerns
that are associated. Um, right. An
allegation isn't sufficient for a
removal for cause because for cause
requires a determination that misconduct
took place. An allegation isn't
sufficient for a determination. You
know, an allegation is totally
sufficient to fire the secretary of the
treasury because that person serves at
the pleasure of the president. And the
president can say, I fired the secretary
because the secretary there are
allegations that the secretary engage in
misconduct. That's totally sufficient.
But Lisa Cook is not an official that
serves at the pleasure of the president.
Lisa Cook is closer to being a federal
judge, an official who has a tenure in
office, a vested legal right to serve in
their position. And to take that away,
the president has to follow a process
and have a ground and make a conclusion.
And none of that has happened here,
which is another reason that this is an
illegal firing. So just before we go any
further, give us a recap of the
accusations against Lisa Cook because as
you point out, they feed into the debate
over whether this could count as
malfeasants, particularly in office.
>> Yeah. Okay. So I will do that. I just
think we should note at the sort of at
the top that there's a way in which
while this is about Lisa Cook, it's also
not about Lisa Cook at all. This is
about J Pal. This is about the rest of
the board. This is about the president's
determination to subordinate one of the
most powerful parts of the government as
part of a larger campaign to control as
much of the government as possible. And
the move against Cook is a preview of
coming events for other board members if
in fact the firing is able to take
effect. Okay. So what is the specific
case against Cook? It has to do with two
mortgages that she took out before she
became a governor of the Federal
Reserve. And so it appears as though the
administration has been digging around
in mortgage records and they found I
don't know whether they were looking at
Lisa Cook in particular or government
officials. They found that Lisa Cook had
two mortgage applications, both of which
claimed that she intended to make the
property that was collateral for the
loan her primary residence. And so the
allegation is that this is mortgage
fraud. Of course, fraud requires an
intent. And so on its face, just the two
documents is not sufficient to convict
somebody of a crime. nor can you be sort
of convicted of a crime, you know, on
the Twitter sphere. The ordinary way in
which it would get worked out whether
there was fraud here is there would be a
private government investigation by
prosecutors, they could get an
indictment, etc. None of that has
happened, right? This is guilty until
proven innocent. And it doesn't seem to
even be the goal of the administration
to to run a proper proceeding to
determine whether this private
misconduct took place. The point is to
point to this private misconduct and
say, "Now I can fire you from the
Federal Reserve." And that's where
there's just a big disconnect because
allegations of private misconduct,
there's just no precedent that supports
a removal for cause from a government
position on that basis. And the
president has pointed to none and the
white house has pointed to none. Mostly
what they're pointing to and what this
is going to ultimately be a case about
is their inherent constitutional
authority as president, which is what
the court has allowed the president to
invoke in a number of other instances to
ignore statutes, to ignore law, and to
trample on people's rights. And so
that's going to that's part of why also
this is a big case because this is not
just a big case for the Federal Reserve.
It's also just a big case for the rule
of law in our system and the extent to
which we are a government of laws and
not of people.
>> These are extremely important things
that we have to get across. What happens
now in terms of like the questions
because she's going to fight it. I
believe her lawyers put out a statement
last night. What's your understanding of
how things could play out in terms of
like even her going to her office at the
building and being included in meetings
because these processes take time if
it's going to go to the Supreme Court.
Yeah, this is a very messy moment. And
so the initial clarification will come
from the courts because presumably Lisa
Cook's lawyers will seek a preliminary
injunction reinstating her from federal
district court in the same way that Gwyn
Wilcox at the NLRB did that Bedoya at
the FTC did when they were removed
earlier this year. Right? So, we know
how that process kind of works, but
there's this period of time between when
the president tries to fire someone who
is statutoily protected from being fired
by the president and the federal courts
make a decision about whether that
person's going to get to continue to
work in their job while the litigation
is going on where who knows. So right
now to your question, the Federal
Reserve Board and Jay Powell as the
active executive officer of the board is
in a difficult position where they have
to decide does she still have her office
and they're under an independent
obligation to follow the law, right?
They don't get to just say the president
told me so. They swore to uphold the
law. So, they have to make their own
determination about whether she was in
fact fired by a social media post,
right? That didn't follow any of the
proper process. And it's an invalid
firing on its face. And under existing
law, it doesn't have any legal effect.
Maybe Supreme Court's going to change
the law like they've done before, but I
think Pal here
>> has to let her in the building. And
that's going to create a separate
showdown between the board, its lawyers,
J. pal as active executive officer of
the board and the president.
>> That's interesting. So there's two
parallel legal arguments going on. One
at the Fed and one in the court system.
Just going back to the court system for
a second, we have of course had firings
at other agencies this year. And as part
of those, the Supreme Court basically
carved out an exception for the Fed
saying that I think it's uniquely
structured. And
>> it's different because it's different.
>> It's different because it's different.
as we said. So,
>> yeah, there's a carveout. Would that
come into play here or could they just
cancel the carveout?
>> So, the carveout isn't direct to this
issue.
>> Okay.
>> So, there are these other independent
agencies just like the Fed, Federal
Trade Commission, SEC, National Labor
Relations Board, and they all say that
people have tenure in office for a term
of years, and the president can only
remove for cause. And we were talking
about how usually those causes are
specified. What the president did
earlier this year is say, "I don't need
to follow that statute. I don't have any
cause to remove you. I'm just going to
remove you as if you serve at pleasure
because under the Constitution, I can do
that." And that case went after the
Supreme Court. And that's what you're
referring to. And that case is called
Will Cox. And in May, the court said,
"Yeah, you're probably going to win on
that, president, because we're into this
theory of your inherent powers that's
pretty much unmed from the American
legal tradition, but we're going to
probably endorse it when we get this
case on the merits next year." And so,
in the meantime, all these people are
out of jobs. And then they said out of
nowhere, because the case doesn't
involve the Federal Reserve at all, they
say, "Oh, by the way, just in case
anybody's like watching who's wondering
like, can I fire people at the Federal
Reserve? We think the Federal Reserve
probably is a different situation, but
that's with respect to whether the cause
language is binding on the president.
And so the president read that
>> this is actually all downstream of the
Will Cox order from the court because
the White House lawyer said, "Okay, now
we're going to go out and try to find
causes that we can sort of manufacture,
cook up, and push the envelope on this
legal provision." And so the court
didn't protect the Federal Reserve from
this in Willox. It in some sense invited
the White House to try this. And so now
the ca this case will go back to the
Supreme Court presumably. And the
Supreme Court will have to say does this
for cause thing is it for real or is it
just a paper requirement? Is it just
proforma? because the president is
treating it like it's nothing more than
putting out a press release alongside
the removal, which is definitely not how
Congress understood it when they wrote
the Federal Reserve Act or how this was
litigated in the past when this was a
bigger issue in American government.
This is really important clarification
that when Trump fired some of those
other people, they were trying to
establish the notion that these sort of
so-called like independent agencies were
actually just constitutionally
illegitimate. Right. There was a
specific point there.
>> Exactly.
>> And so there was no pretext for invoking
the cause because that wasn't the goal.
The goal was to establish their
illegitimacy, not to necessarily change
the partisan makeup per se, though maybe
that was uh the case. In the case of the
Fed,
I mean, you say that this firing was
downstream from the Willox decision, but
was it I mean, the for cause ability has
never like the idea that you could fire
for cause has always been there, right?
Like they didn't need the carveout from
Will Cox to fire someone for cause, even
if even if we dispute that this actually
rises to that level. Yeah, I think this
is a great question and it's come up a
few times in conversations that I've
had. I think the thing to understand
about the Will Cox order is how radical
it was for the Supreme Court to say that
this bedrock precedent on which the US
government is designed
is probably invalid and therefore the
president can fire all these people
don't don't get to work while they
litigate their cases. They're out of
their jobs. And so the court in Willox
embraced such a broad conception of the
presidency
in such a sort of unorthodox
unmed fashion that the main signal from
that isn't that the Fed is protected but
it's that this court is going to bend
over backwards for very broad conception
of the president's power. And so when
you read that as a lawyer for the
president, what you think is, okay, they
don't want to be tagged with concluding
that central bank independence is on its
face legally invalid in the United
States, but they also are going to let
us do what we want. And so the thing to
do is to now push on this for cause and
act like it's not actually a very
rigorous bar and we'll get what we want
because it was so surprising that they
got what they want with respect to the
FTC and the NLRB. And so there's this
sense that people had after Will Cox,
oh, the court is protecting the Fed. But
the real message in Willox that overrode
that sense of protection is the court's
going to come up with reasons when push
comes to shove not to pen in the
president.
[Music]
Why do you think the Trump
administration wants to exert control
over the Federal Reserve? Because, you
know, we just had a speech from Jerome
Pal at Jackson Hole where he opened the
door to interest rate cuts in September.
So, it would seem things are sort of
heading in the direction that Trump
wants even though I will point out
there's a tension there because he says
the economy is great, but also he wants
rate cuts. Why is this important to him?
So the Federal Reserve is the most
powerful agency in the federal
government and alongside the Supreme
Court and the White House, those are the
three most powerful government bodies in
the United States in 2025.
And the Fed's power has expanded
dramatically since the 2008 financial
crisis. and it has turned its balance
sheet into an active policy tool. And
that means that it is a very shiny prize
for a president that does not want to
have to go to Congress for
appropriations to carry out various
policies. Here you have an infinitely
extensible balance sheet. Now, it's
meant to be used to ensure stable
monetary expansion over time, but what
we've seen is it can be put to other
uses. I think some of those are legally
questionable, but you can imagine a
president who doesn't believe in
following laws, believes in inherent
executive authority with control over an
infinitely extensible central bank
balance sheet,
can do all sorts of different stuff. So
this is a very shiny prize even beyond
interest rate policy. I I think I
wouldn't underemphasize the interest
rate policy component. Yes, Trump wants
lower rates and there's a indication
that rates will be lowered at the next
meeting, but not by the amount Trump is
demanding.
>> Trump wants to run a boom economy,
overheated economy. And in order to do
that, he wants to create very easy
credit conditions and loose monetary
policy and monetary expansion. And the
Fed is not going to do that on its own.
He's going to have to take over the
institution if he wants them to do that.
The whole institution is designed not to
engage in such a boom and bust type of
macroeconomic management. And that's
actively what he wants and I think what
we will get and the markets are only
very slowly waking up to that. M
>> yeah it it does seem well I mean who
knows I mean you look at some of the the
way asset prices are flying maybe the
market is clued to
>> maybe the market is clued in yes because
the way this goes is we get asset bubble
right we get a lot of leverage in the
financial system because we deregulate
bank balance sheets and we lower
short-term interest rates that's going
to lead to lots of credit expansion and
that's going to be an inflationary boom
the reason why we don't run the economy
like that normally is it ends in tears
Um, there's going to be a bust later,
but you know, as I believe it was Chuck
Prince once said, when the music is
playing, keep dancing.
>> Maybe the uh the bust will be four years
later, right? And Trump won't
necessarily care if he's out of the
presidency.
>> It could certainly go for years. You
know, we've seen irrationally exuberant
markets led by actual underlying
structural credit expansion fuel bubbles
for for a long period of time. By the
way, I think if I were like a banker or
a lender or a professional trader, I
would know. I would get out right at the
top. I just have that feeling that I
could do it. It's like, let's keep it
going. And
>> why doesn't everyone do that?
>> I know it's a I know it's a bubble or
boom, but I just have this feeling that
I would be able to time the top.
>> It's the OddLots podcast. That's how you
know that's where you get your special
insight. Could the question of whether
Powell and like again, you know, who
knows what's going to happen today? Uh,
let Cook back into the building. Could
that be a pretext for an attack on Paulo
himself?
>> Absolutely. I mean, I think that this
president or the White House more
generally has floated any number of
possible sort of constructed cases to
remove officials. And so they obviously
floated the renovations, but a failure
to follow a presidential order.
Everything the president says is not
law. This is a common misconception. But
this president thinks it is law. And so
it would be easy to for the president to
say this is law.
>> But you know, I'm sure these are the
types of things that people debate
forever in law school. And every time I
talk to lawyers, I'm reminded it's like
all law is just what people agree is law
at any given moment, right? Including
the most anything can be re anything
could be reinterpreted. Anything can be
contrived. Anything can be turned into a
loophole. Like at the end like the only
thing Butcherson written laws is some
sort of stomach to enforce them, right?
Yes. Law is a social coordinating
mechanism and in order for it to work,
we have to have the shared understanding
and follow it. And that's why things
like this have such high stakes because
when a government actor flagrantly
violates what the prior understanding
is, it sort of tears at the fabric of
law as a consensus building mechanism.
By the way, 11:26 uh headline just
flashing through the terminal. Lawyer
for Fence Cook says she will file
lawsuit challenging firing. So that's
confirmed.
>> Clearly still a live issue. Just to
recap, I just want someone to lay out
this argument very clearly and you tend
to do that, Lev. Uh you tend to do it
very well. So
>> why is central bank independence
important?
This is a big question that could
probably support an entire episode and I
think you guys have we have explored
this at other times and you've explored
it with some other guests. I saw your
episode with Corolla Binder. Central
bank independence is important for the
reasons that the economists put forward
which have to do with credibility and
long-term decisionm being best furthered
by special purpose officials. Right? You
don't want to overload people with
competing priorities. You're going to
get less quality policy. And so that's
why you have a 14-year term of office
here because we want Fed officials
making long-term decisions. We don't
want short-term decisions about changes
in the money supply. And so all of
that's true. There's a time
inconsistency problem. This is a
long-term policym domain. But I actually
think right now it's important to
emphasize something that's not actually
a big part or really any part of the
economics literature and that has to do
with the separation of powers and
democracy. And you don't want to
concentrate too much power in a
government in any one person. And that's
actually a foundational idea in the
American constitutional system. Arguably
the founders went too far in separating
powers. They made it very difficult for
the government to do stuff. And what's
happened here is we've concentrated
power in the president in a way that
would have all of the framers of the
constitution rolling in their graves and
to allow the executive to control the
money supply. That's literally an issue
that led to the glorious revolution in
1688. It's one of the key concerns of
the founders is to separate control of
the money supply from the executive. And
so central bank independence is also
about good government and preventing
tyranny. And Alexander Hamilton said
this in his report on a national bank.
And so it's not just about having
optimal long-term monetary policy. It's
also about preventing one person from
controlling way too much. You know, for
the maybe the last 15 years or maybe
from 2010 through 20 through co there
was like a left critique of central bank
independence but it was very you know it
seemed to be very focused on this idea
that the central bank by having this
like you know a was just not
democratically accountable that it was
accountable to the interests of money
holders to not lose the value of their
money that that was constraining the
rebound of labor etc. Are those
critiques suddenly vanishing because it
feels more important to make the
argument that you're making?
>> So, I always felt those critiques were
part right and part wrong.
>> Okay.
>> And the part that was right is that the
central bank in the United States was
structured in a way that made it too
responsive to financial interests and
not responsive enough to the Congress
and to the American people's interest.
and that led to an excessively tight
monetary policy over an extended period
of time. But the solution to that is not
to have a Federal Reserve under the
control of the White House. That is not
a solution to an insufficiently
democratic monetary policy. The solution
is to change the structure of the
Federal Reserve system and who
influences those officials. And that
means increasing the influence of
Congress. It might mean increasing
opportunities for judicial review.
There's almost no judicial review of the
Fed. It might mean removing the bankers
from the boards of the regional Federal
Reserve banks. It might mean changing
the Fed's responsibilities and the
statutory scheme that it's executing.
There are all sorts of ways to create an
administrative agency that is more
responsive to democratic interests
besides putting it under the president.
and actually putting an agency under the
president. We have actually a bunch of
experience with what that looks like and
that makes most policy as a general
matter more favorable to wealthy
business interests. And so there's
definitely a valid critique that central
bank independence as we knew it as
central banks were constructed led to a
bias in central bank policy towards
certain interests. But the solution to
that problem isn't let's bring in the
president that will make the central
bank policy more appealing and
appropriate.
>> Levand, thank you so much for coming
back on OddLotss for yet another central
bank independence episode. Appreciate
it.
>> Thank you for having me.
[Music]
Joe, always good to get Levan. I feel
like he explains the issue very, very
clearly. I guess we'll see what happens
both in the court system and also within
the Fed itself because I thought it was
really interesting this idea of like two
parallel legal tracks here where the Fed
is obligated to also follow the law and
so they need to figure out for
themselves whether or not the firing is
legal.
>> Absolutely. I mean this is very serious
like sort of high stakes immediate stuff
that there are questions that are not
easily resolved by the time they uh get
to the Supreme Court. I also just found
his argument very like persuasive that
like an allegation is not cause right
like setting aside like you know what
constitutes cause and maybe that is
ambiguous in this particular case etc.
All we have is an allegation,
>> right? There's supposed to be due
process to figure out whether or not the
allegation is in fact true. Also, an
allegation that didn't actually happen
while Lisa Cook was in office, which
also plays into that malfeasance
argument.
>> I'm guessing we'll have plenty more to
talk about on this topic in the future.
So, uh, shall we leave it there for now?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the Odd
Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Aloway
>> and I'm Joe Weisenth. You can follow me
at the stalwart. Follow our guest Lev
Manand. He's Lev Manand. Follow our
producers Kerman Rodriguez at Kerman
Arman Dash Bennett at Dashbot and
Kalebrooks at Kalebrooks. For more
OddLots content, go to
bloomberg.com/odlots
where we have a daily newsletter and all
of our episodes. And you can chat about
all of these topics 24/7 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlots.
>> And enjoy OddLots. If you like it when
we do these emergency episodes, then
please leave us a positive review on
your favorite podcast platform. And
remember, if you are a Bloomberg
subscriber, you can listen to all of our
episodes absolutely adree. All you need
to do is find the Bloomberg channel on
Apple Podcast and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
[Music]
Hey.